---
title: "Plunge Journey"
date: 2024-05-08T14:47:29-07:00
draft: true
---

Last year, my brother and I (take that English teachers!) started dipping our
toes into taking ice baths for recovery from rock climbing / yoga / running /
lifting. My bro wanted to try the latest instagram Chad trend and I finally
decided to lean in to Chad-dom after tearing my meniscus pretty bad and
looking for ways to recover. They actually kinda worked. I just wanted to
document what we did for the future ice bath curious since it was actually
somewhat hard to find numbers despite the number of nerds doing ice baths now
but apparently I'm doing it wrong by not doing this on youtube and getting
this post sponsored by Ice Barrel. Whatever man.

### So it begins

TODO photo?

We started off trying the bath tub we had inside the house. This didn't work
very well. We either had to keep our knees out or our upper body out. If you
have a gigantic tub you can submerge in and only want to take an ice bath once
a week, maybe this is an economical option if you can make enough ice (we'll
get to that) or don't mind buying it. That being said, it took less ice
to cool than an outdoor tub due to the small size. 1-2 bags was enough to get
the tap water under 60 degrees. We started here, so this was pretty miserable
even without fully submerging. We were fighting for 3 minutes at the time. ha!

We also used our friend's pool since it was April the pool was generally
50-55. This is a pretty sweet option if you live somewhere cool enough and
have a pool but is probably the least economical option unless you aren't
paying for it ;) Jumping in definitely hits different too.

We felt pretty amazing on a few levels so we decided it was time for us to get
serious with the weather heating up. The dopamine rush is pretty real when you
start, and we were less sore than normal - not scientific at all but pretty
nice. I was also pretty optimistic about the metabolism effects at the time.

### Buying into the hype

TODO photo?

We went to Tractor Supply and bought a 110 gallon stock tank. Then we drove
back home and got the Jeep and came back to pick it up. Don't make my mistake.
Stock tanks don't fit in sedans. The stock tank was $150 which seemed cheap
after looking at the other options at the time and not really understanding
the amount of ice we were going to have to buy when it's 110 degrees outside.
It also seemed more sturdy than the flimsy inflatable ones with pvc poles all
over amazon and our hope was that we could leave water in it and it would be
cooler than tap water overnight, maybe changing it every few sessions. Boy,
were we wrong.

We started off with freezing a whole pack of water bottles from Costco. And
this worked okay to start with spring temps, we could get the water down to
55. 
TODO finish section

In the peak of summer, we ended up needing 4-5 16lb bags of ice every time we
wanted to plunge to get to 50-55F (each of us heated it up 3 degrees by our
reading every plunge). This was __with__ changing the water each time, which
was typically coming out about 75F in Las Vegas up near the mountains even
where it's a little bit cooler than in town. The tub water was generally 80+.
Yes, even in the shade. Our rule of thumb was basically 5 degrees per bag of
ice. This also meant I had to wait for Costco to open at 10am, go to Costco,
run through the daily AARP meetup with my usually empty cart and buy ice. Each
bag cost about $3, which was a steal compared to Albertsons who charged $2.50
for 7 lbs ice. That membership paid for itself very quickly, and luckily was
pretty convenient location wise but it's still a bit of a thing.

This means that for 3x baths per week we're looking at $40+ per week. We did
baths from basically April until October pretty consistently when we weren't
traveling so we'll call it 5 months x 4 weeks x $40 = $800. This is pretty
wasteful on a number of levels. We wanted to use the water to water plants but
it wasn't that easy to set up with the stock tank, sadly.

Lessons learned:

- We would have been better off with one of the crappy inflatable flimsy ones
from amazon for $100. We emptied and refilled almost every time anyway and the
form factor is more efficient than the stock tank in terms of gallons, we
would have needed less ice most likely maybe by a bag which adds up.

- We would have broken even on an ice barrel for $1000!

### Commit, engage

TODO photo?

I decided it was time to up the game and just get a chiller. I had looked into
this previously and the heads seemed to suggest getting a 1/2hp chiller which
is about $1000 on Amazon. This seemed silly last year but after doing the math
pretty quickly seemed worth it if only for the convenience gains of not having
the flight risk of breaking anyone's hip at Costco buying ice 3x a week.

My logic was that we could turn the chiller on in the morning on days we want
to plunge and a few hours later have the water ready. I didn't understand why
everyone was so fixated on the insulated tubs which generally are also over
$1000 if we could just turn the chiller on demand basically -- we didn't need
the water at a certain temp every day since we aren't plunging daily.

In a stroke of brilliance I actually believed the marketing fluff on a site
offering 1/3 hp that I could get 65 degree water to 55 degrees in a couple of
hours. Ha!

TODO laughing gif

The first day we tested this out I set it up about 1:30pm on an 80F day, tap
water was 63 and by 5pm it had only gone down a few degrees to about 58.
Barely cold enough for one of us to get a bath in. This was definitely not
going to work in the summer even overnight it seemed like and even then it was
pretty clear without an insulated tub this was going to maybe be running all
the time just costing money, which was the thing we were trying to avoid!

I was optimistic about getting a better water pump and maybe fixing this but I
got a Danner 700 water pump and it didn't seem to do a whole lot better than
the dinky water pump the chiller came with. I was also somewhat optimistic
about a flimsy inflatable pvc one doing better with the cooling down since it
was slightly less water, so spent $100 on one of those and it wasn't really a
whole lot better either.

### Plunge Kings

TODO we got an ice barrel

